# pda
Probability Distribution Arithmetic

A C++ library for computing with distributed random numbers.

## Installation
```
git clone https://github.com/molbrich/pda.git
cd pda_lib
make
```

## Documentation
A doxygen documentation can be generated by
```
make doc
```
in the pda_lib folder.

## Example

Assume, we have two random variables: A resistance r and a capacitance c. 
Both are independently normal distributed. 
As a choice concerning the accuracy of our calculations, we will use a second order arithmetic. 
As the first step in our program, we will initialize a Probability Distribution Arithmetic (PDA) by:
```
PDA pda(2,2);  // Order: 2, : Independent variables: 2
```
This also implicitly initializes two standard normal distributed random variables Delta_0 and Delta_1.
They are called Basis Random Variables (BRVs) and are statistically independent.
Let us come back to the resistor and the capacitor:
The random variable r should have a nominal value of 200 and a standard deviation of 50. 
This can be represented by

r = 200 + 50 Delta_0

using the BRV Delta_0.
Let the nominal value of the random variable c be 0.01 and the standard deviation 0.001. 
Then, c can be represented as

c = 0.01 + 0.001 Delta_1

with Delta_1 being the second BRV.
In C++ we define two Probability Distribution Variables (PDVs) for r and c:
```
PDV r(pda, 200);  // Nominal value of r is 200
PDV c(pda, 0.01); // Nominal value of c is 0.01
```
and add the distributed part to them:
```
r.setDeltaCoeff(0, 50);    // Set standard deviation of r to 50 (using Delta_0)
c.setDeltaCoeff(1, 0.001); // Set standard deviation of c to 0.01 (using Delta_1)
```
Then, we can calculate a time t as the product of r and c:
```
PDV t(pda);
t = r * c;
```
Now, the variable t contains the whole distribution information of r * c.
We can determine the mean (expected value) and the standard deviation of t by
```
std::cout << "Mean of t: " << t.getMean() << std::endl;
std::cout << "Standard deviation of t: " << t.getStandardDeviation() << std::endl;
```
We can add arbitrary calculations with PDVs.
Correlations between the variables are automatically preserved.
And we can get the (estimated) moments of each variable afterwards.

Please have a look at the hello-world.cpp program in examples/hello-world as an other running example.

## Publications
* M. Olbrich: Extended Probability Distribution Arithmetic. ICECOCS 2020. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/ICECOCS50124.2020.9314534)
* M. Olbrich, E. Barke: Distribution arithmetic for stochastical analysis, ASPDAC 2008. [DOI](https://doi.org/10.1109/ASPDAC.2008.4484009)
